homework/socket-io-lab.markdown, before:

---
layout: homework
title: CSCI-UA.0480 - Socket IO Lab
---

<div class="panel panel-default">
  <div class="panel-heading">socket.io Lab</div>
  <div class="panel-body" markdown="block">

# Socket IO Lab - Emoji Racer (10 points for In-Class Project/Quiz Grade)

## Submission Process

* work in groups of 2 or 3
* __submit using [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd1UqaFt4HVrj9j1IaHdx-2EpBQtjBfIELBxoM3r7_XrfhtZQ/viewform)__
* __each person on the team should submit their own individual form__

## Scoring

* __+7 points__ for showing up and submitting form 
* __+2 points__ form submitted with a _reasonable_ amount of _valid looking_ code
* __+1 point__ code deployed on glitch.com (kind of optional, since you basically get 90% for just submitting a form with some code!)

## Overview

### Goals / Topics Covered

You'll be using the following concepts:

* socket.io
* some simple dom manipulation
* absolute or fixed positioning

### Description

Make a real time web app that:

1. displays two emoji
2. displays two buttons
3. displays a finish line
4. clicking on one button moves one emoji
5. everyone connected to the game can click either button
6. everyone connected to the game can see the emoji move in real time
7. when someone new connects to the game, the should see the current position of both emoji
8. (optional) end game and show message when one emoji crosses the finish line


![Emoji Racer](../resources/img/hw09-screen.gif)


## Instructions

### Setup

Use the _one-page_ version of the slides to guide you through socket.io:

[https://foureyes.github.io/csci-ua.0480-fall2017-007/slides/23/socketio.html?print-pdf#/](https://foureyes.github.io/csci-ua.0480-fall2017-007/slides/23/socketio.html?print-pdf#/)

1. create a directory to store your project
2. create your `package.json` and install these packages:
  <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
npm init
npm install --save express socket.io
</code></pre>
3. use this boilerplate code for the server (perhaps in server.js or app.js):
    <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
const express = require('express');
const app = express();
const server = require('http').Server(app);
const io = require('socket.io')(server);
app.use(express.static('public'));
// server code goes here!
// first listen for connection using io.on
// then... within callback, use socket.on, socket.emit, socket.broadcast, etc.
// NOTE THAT WE ARE LISTENING WITH server, NOT app!
server.listen(3000);
</code></pre>
4. use this boilerplate code for the markup (in `public/index.html`):
  <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;
&lt;html&gt;
&lt;head&gt;
&lt;title&gt;&lt;/title&gt;
&lt;/head&gt;
&lt;body&gt;
&lt;script src="/socket.io/socket.io.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;script src="racer.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;button class="player1Btn"&gt;Move Tears of Joy &amp;rarr;&lt;/button&gt;
&lt;div class="play-area"&gt;
  &lt;div class="racer player1"&gt;&amp;#128514;&lt;/div&gt;
  &lt;div class="racer player2"&gt;&amp;#128561;&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;button class="player2Btn"&gt;Move Face Screaming &amp;rarr;&lt;/button&gt;
&lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;
</code></pre>
5. use this boilerplate code for the client (in `public/racer.js`):
    <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
    const socket = io();
</code></pre>

## Deployment

### Deploying to glitch.com

1. [go to glitch.com/edit](https://glitch.com/edit/)
2. modify the existing `package.json` so that it has both socket.io and express as requirements (but keep everything else the same)
3. add/modify necessary files!
    * for example...
    * modify `server.js` (make sure you're listening with server obj)
    * add `public/racer.html`
    * change the name of `public/client.js` to `public/racer.js`
    * etc.
4. __change the port so that it looks in the env for the port number!__
    * `server.listen(process.env.PORT);`
5. click on the look link...  
    * instantly deployed app!
    * (click on logs link to see server output)

<div class="hideInner" markdown="block">

## Major Hints (Click to Reveal)

<div class="hidden" markdown="block">

### Wait, How Do I Even?

Most real-time games work by having the server be the _single source of truth_ for game state (for example, the positions of the emoji). 

An easy way to implement this game is by:

1. storing the positions of both emoji on the server (global variables would be sufficient)
2. pushing out the exact positions of each emoji to the connected clients
    * rather than incrementing the position
    * (because it reduces the possibility of the positions becoming out of sync)


### Don't feel like dealing with css? You can use this:

<pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
&lt;style type="text/css" media="screen"&gt;

.racer {
  position: absolute;
  left: 0px;
  font-size: 100px;
}

.player1 {
  top: 50px;
}    

.player2 {
  top: 300px
}    

.play-area {
  position: relative;
  width: 800px;
  height: 500px;
  border-right: 3px dashed black;
}

button {
  font-size: 3em;
}
&lt;/style&gt;

</code></pre>


</div>
<script>
document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', main);
function main() {
    const divs = document.querySelectorAll('.hideInner');

    function handleClick() {
        this.querySelector('div').classList.toggle('hidden');
    }

    divs.forEach((d) => {
        d.addEventListener('click', handleClick);
    });
}

</script>
<style>
.hidden {
    display: none;
}
</style>


</div>
</div>

Commit message:

update details for socket.io lab

homework/socket-io-lab.markdown, after:

---
layout: homework
title: CSCI-UA.0480 - Socket IO Lab
---

<div class="panel panel-default">
  <div class="panel-heading">socket.io Lab</div>
  <div class="panel-body" markdown="block">

# Socket IO Lab - Emoji Racer (10 points for In-Class Project/Quiz Grade)

## Submission Process

* work in groups of 2 or 3
* __submit using [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd1UqaFt4HVrj9j1IaHdx-2EpBQtjBfIELBxoM3r7_XrfhtZQ/viewform)__
* __each person on the team should submit their own individual form__

## Scoring

* __+7 points__ for showing up and submitting form 
* __+2 points__ form submitted with a _reasonable_ amount of _valid looking_ code
* __+1 point__ code deployed on glitch.com (kind of optional, since you basically get 90% for just submitting a form with some code!)

## Overview

### Goals / Topics Covered

You'll be using the following concepts:

* socket.io
* some simple dom manipulation
* absolute or fixed positioning

### Description / Requirements

<span sytle="background-color: #ffaabb">Make a real time web app that:</span>

1. displays two emoji
2. displays two buttons
3. displays a finish line
4. clicking on one button moves one emoji
5. everyone connected to the game can click either button
6. everyone connected to the game can see the emoji move in real time
    * be careful in choosing `socket.emit`, `io.emit`, and `socket.broadcast.emit`
7. when someone new connects to the game, __they should see the current position of both emoji__
8. (optional) end game and show message when one emoji crosses the finish line
9. __there are hints at the end of these instructions__


![Emoji Racer](../resources/img/hw09-screen.gif)


## Instructions

### Setup

Use the _one-page_ version of the slides to guide you through socket.io:

[https://foureyes.github.io/csci-ua.0480-fall2017-007/slides/23/socketio.html?print-pdf#/](https://foureyes.github.io/csci-ua.0480-fall2017-007/slides/23/socketio.html?print-pdf#/)

1. create a directory to store your project
2. create your `package.json` and install these packages:
  <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
npm init
npm install --save express socket.io
</code></pre>
3. use this boilerplate code for the server (perhaps in server.js or app.js):
    <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
const express = require('express');
const app = express();
const server = require('http').Server(app);
const io = require('socket.io')(server);
app.use(express.static('public'));
// server code goes here!
// first listen for connection using io.on
// then... within callback, use socket.on, socket.emit, socket.broadcast, etc.
// NOTE THAT WE ARE LISTENING WITH server, NOT app!
server.listen(3000);
</code></pre>
4. use this boilerplate code for the markup (in `public/index.html`):
  <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;
&lt;html&gt;
&lt;head&gt;
&lt;title&gt;&lt;/title&gt;
&lt;/head&gt;
&lt;body&gt;
&lt;script src="/socket.io/socket.io.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;script src="racer.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;button class="player1Btn"&gt;Move Tears of Joy &amp;rarr;&lt;/button&gt;
&lt;div class="play-area"&gt;
  &lt;div class="racer player1"&gt;&amp;#128514;&lt;/div&gt;
  &lt;div class="racer player2"&gt;&amp;#128561;&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;button class="player2Btn"&gt;Move Face Screaming &amp;rarr;&lt;/button&gt;
&lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;
</code></pre>
5. use this boilerplate code for the client (in `public/racer.js`):
    <pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
    const socket = io();
</code></pre>

## Deployment

### Deploying to glitch.com

1. [go to glitch.com/edit](https://glitch.com/edit/)
2. modify the existing `package.json` so that it has both socket.io and express as requirements (but keep everything else the same)
3. add/modify necessary files!
    * for example...
    * modify `server.js` (make sure you're listening with server obj)
    * add `public/racer.html`
    * change the name of `public/client.js` to `public/racer.js`
    * etc.
4. __change the port so that it looks in the env for the port number!__
    * `server.listen(process.env.PORT);`
5. click on the look link...  
    * instantly deployed app!
    * (click on logs link to see server output)

<div class="hideInner" markdown="block">

## Major Hints (Click to Reveal)

<div class="hidden" markdown="block">

### Wait, How Do I Even?

Most real-time games work by having the server be the _single source of truth_ for game state (for example, the positions of the emoji). 

An easy way to implement this game is by:

1. storing the positions of both emoji on the server (global variables would be sufficient)
2. pushing out the exact positions of each emoji to the connected clients
    * rather than incrementing the position
    * (because it reduces the possibility of the positions becoming out of sync)


### Don't feel like dealing with css? You can use this:

<pre><code data-trim contenteditable>
&lt;style type="text/css" media="screen"&gt;

.racer {
  position: absolute;
  left: 0px;
  font-size: 100px;
}

.player1 {
  top: 50px;
}    

.player2 {
  top: 300px
}    

.play-area {
  position: relative;
  width: 800px;
  height: 500px;
  border-right: 3px dashed black;
}

button {
  font-size: 3em;
}
&lt;/style&gt;

</code></pre>


</div>
<script>
document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', main);
function main() {
    const divs = document.querySelectorAll('.hideInner');

    function handleClick() {
        this.querySelector('div').classList.toggle('hidden');
    }

    divs.forEach((d) => {
        d.addEventListener('click', handleClick);
    });
}

</script>
<style>
.hidden {
    display: none;
}
</style>


</div>
</div>
